Bogost, Ian. *Alien Phenomenology, or What It's Like to Be a Thing*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.

Epigraph is from They May Might Be Giants--an ominous start.

8:  Citing Nash & Broglio introduction to *Configurations* issue on animal studies, Bogost states: "Once more, we find a focus on creatures from the vantage point of human intersubjectivity, rather than from the weird, murky mists of the really real."

8:  "We might also question animal studies' arbitrary specificity. Why trees and sea turtles instead of minerals or stem and leaf succulents? As Steven Shaviro has said in a passing criticism of the zoocentrism animal studies exhibits, 'What about plants, fungi, protists, bacteria, etc.?"

The answer to this seems rather obvious. Animal studies names "animals" as its object of studies. The word "studies" generally refers to something like the "sociology of [x] and humans." The criticism is odd: do they also criticize theoretical astrophysicists for not including lasagna in their analyses of black holes? This is stupid. Furthermore, I doubt anyone "in" animal studies would have many serious objections to studying, as Shaviro puts it, "plants, fungi, protists, bacteria, etc." Indeed, there are people who do so--i.e., "plant studies."

10:  "for the computer to operate at all *for us* first requires a wealth of interactions to take place *for itself*."

10:  vitalist/panpsychist approaches: "draws far too much attention to the similarities between humans and objects, rather than their differences."

11:  "In short, *all things equally exist, yet they do not exist equally*. The funeral pyre is not the same as the aardvark; the porcelleta shell is not equivalent to the rugby ball. Not only is neither pair reducible to human encounter, but also neither is reducible to the other."

It isn't clear how these two examples demonstrate the maxim. Part of the reason is that Bogost appears to be equivocating. In the first half of the maxim, "equally exist" refers to whether a thing exists or not. Hence, if it exists, then it exists. Full stop. In the second half of the maxim, the words "equally" and "exist" have taken on a new meaning. "Equal" is now taken to mean "in the same way." It is a moderately clever turn of phrase, but it is confused. Fortunately, in the next paragraph, Bogost comments "This maxim may seem like a tautology--or just a gag." If so, it's a bad one.

12:  A reiteration is more helpful: "things can *be* many and various, specific and concrete, while their *being* remains identical."

12-3:  "I've given the name *system operations* to the top-down organizing principles symbolized by ideas like 'the world' in Bryant's sense. System operations are 'totalizing structures that seek to explicate a phenomenon, behavior or state in its entirety.' They tend to assume that some final, holistic, definitive explanation accounts for and explains being."

Citing Ian Bogost, *Unit Operations*, 6. MIT Press, 2006.

13:  "In our current age, two such system operations are dominant: scientific naturalism and social relativism. The first descends from Democritus and Epicurus, if indirectly. The scientific naturalist holds that some fundamental material firmament sustains and thereby explains all that is. The particulars of this ground don't particularly matter--particle physics, genetics, brain chemistry, whatever. Never mind the *sort* of stuff, for the scientific naturalist there is always *some* stuff out of which all others can be explained. Furthermore, the nature of these fundamental objects and their role in founding the world can always be discovered, documented, and solidified through the scientific process. Kuhnian paradigm shifts notwithstanding, scientific naturalism assumes the ever-progressing if incremental discovery of reality through scientific persistence.
"The second ontological system operation of our time, social relativism, descends from the humanistic and social scientific traditions. For the social relativist, nothing exists that cannot be explained through the machinations of human society--particularly the complex, evolutionary forms of culture and language. The social relativist argues that all things exist through conceptualization; they are really just structures within the temple of human cultural production. For the social relativist, the certainty of the scientific naturalist is always compromised by the fact that science itself is situated within culture--and not just culture writ large but some specific cultural moment, existing a particular time and in a particular place and making particular assumptions."

Rather crude, but serviceable insofar as straw people are built.

14:  "For the scientific naturalist, the world exists for human discovery and exploitation. And for the cultural relativist, humans create and refashion the world."

14:  Interesting point--the Turing Test assumes correlationism insofar as it assumes the sort of thought that machines might have is the human sort of thought.

15:  "a computer is to be considered useful the more it does *intelligent* things, that is, things that benefit human beings or things that human beings can recognize as intelligent activities."

16:  "A true posthumanism would neither extend humanity into a symbiotic, visionary future nor reject our place in the world via antihuman nihilism. 

Citing Levi Bryant, *Democracy of Objects*, 44.

17:  "a flat ontology of computation (or anything else) must be *specific* and *open-ended*, so as to make it less likely to fall into the trap of system operational overdetermination."

21-2:  Claims that it is easy to explain being. Indeed, the explanation "could be rendered via screen print on a trucker's cap." Says it is "tiny ontology." This idea is evidentially so simple that it is explained in four paragraphs (take that, Heidegger) and never actually defined or coherently discussed. A rather Morton-ian moment. "Tiny ontology" means something like a very dense, very small, one-dimensional point. That certainly clears things up. 

22-3:  Relates "tiny ontology" to Bryant's "mereology." Quoting Bryant, *Democracy of Objects*, 215: "one object is simultaneously a part of another object *and* an independent object in its own right."

23:  Term object is unhelpful. First, object and object-oriented have a specific meaning within computer programming and the use of these words introduces confusion. Second, object implies a correlate, subject. Object<=>Subject is correlationist. Third, object implies durable, material things. 

24:  The term thing (which I prefer to use) is also objectionable. Benefit: can be concrete or abstract. Detriment: tied up with Kantian thing-in-itself; Heidegger's view that things are created by humans; psychoanalyst call "lost objects" things. 

25:  "A thing is not just a thing for humans, but a thing for many other things as well, both material and immaterial."

25:  "Unit" is therefore preferable (even though it falls victim to the first criticism of "object"). 

25:  "Counterintuitively, a system and a unit represent three things at once: for one, a unit is isolated and unique. For another, a unit encloses a system---an entire universe's worth. For yet another, a unit becomes part of another system---often many other systems---as it jostles about."

25:  "These systems of units are held together tenuously by accidents. I have adapted the word *operation* to describe how units behave and interact. In systems theory, an operation is 'a basic process that takes one or more inputs and performs a transformation on it.'"

Quoting Ian Bogost, *Unit Operations*, 7.

30:  "*That* things are is not a matter of debate. *What it means that something in particular is for another thing that is*: this is the question that interests me. The significance of one thing to another differs depending on the perspectives of both."

31:  "Speculative realism names not only speculative philosophy that takes existence to be separate from thought but also a philosophy *claiming that things speculate* and, furthermore, one *that speculates about how things speculate*."

35-?:  Second chapter discusses the unfortunate cliche of object-oriented ontology: the list or, as Bogost prefers, "the Latour litany." It is annoying when Latour does it and it is even more annoying when Harman does it. Predictably, annoyance reaches its logical conclusion when Bogost spends pages and pages defending the sad practice (e.g., "turning the flowing legato of a literary account into the jarring staccato of real being"). It'd be nice if the speculative realists would just "do philosophy" and stop trying to "be literary" (Harman is the greatest criminal in this regard).

50:  "The practice of ontography---and it is a practice, not merely a theory---describes the many processes of *accounting for* the various units that strew themselves throughout the universe. To create an ontograph involves cataloging things, but also drawing attention to the couplings of and chasms between them."

61:  "But for the hookah, the gear, or the chicken [in soup pot], what's going on?"

The chicken is dead, dude.

62:  Only now we get a reference to Nagel's "What is it like to be a bat?" Surprised it took so long!

62:  Compares Harman's "withdrawal" to Nagel's "the subjective character of experience." Likely the clearest explanation of Harman's concept. "Because of this elusiveness (which OOO calls *withdrawal*), physical reductionism can never explain the experience of a being."

63:  "But to understand how something operates on its surroundings, or they on it, is not the same as understanding how that other thing *understands* those operations."

Earlier, panpsychism (and, presumably Spinozan panetheism) had been ruled out. We can speak of "understanding" vis a vis things that have something resembling a mind. That is, things that are capable of thought (regardless of how rudimentary). Thus, animals. The argument about "withdrawal" makes sense here: how a bat understands itself is different than how a human understands how a bat understands itself. But Bogost wants to talk about (it seems) how a book understands itself or how a rock understands itself or how a unicorn understands itself. 

64:  "Unlike objective phenomenology [e.g., Nagel], alien phenomenology accepts that the subjective character of experiences cannot be fully recuperated objectively, even if it remains wholly real. In a literal sense, *the only way to perform alien phenomenology is by analogy*."

64-5:  "The risk of falling into anthropocentrism is strong. Indeed, I'll take things farther: anthropocentrism is unavoidable, at least for us humans. The same is true of any unit (for the bats, chiropteracentrism is the problem). The subjective nature of experience makes the unit operation of one of its perceptions amount always to a caricature in which the one is drawn in the distorted impression of the other. This is true not only of the encounter itself but also of any account of the encounter, which only further distances the one from the other by virtue of the introduction of additional layers of mediation."

Generally speaking, Bogost is correct. A particular being cannot escape its bounded "subjective experience" and, thus, their experience is always subjectively bound. Humans can imagine what is like for humans to imagine being bats---awkwardly expressed, but true. A human cannot actually experience bat-ness; only an analogy of it---what it would be like *for a human* to be a bat.

The problem Bogost does not identify is that not all anthropocentrisms are equal. Anthropocentrism, normally conceived, is the idea that there is a necessary connection between ontology and politics such that humans are at the centre of all things and, thus, there politics should be organized accordingly. That the world exists *for* humans and that it is up to humans to organize the world as they see fit given their centrality. Flat ontology has to reject this sense of anthropocentrism, which is the most common.

Without specifying the problem, Bogost is confusing the onto-political sense of anthropocentrism (the usual one) with an epistemological sense of anthropocentrism (how he's using the word). What is at issue for Bogost is the ability of particular things to generalize their perspective (their "subjective experience") in relation to other things. His sense of anthropocentrism asks the question, "Can humans *know* what it is like to be a bat?" The standard sense of anthropocentrism asks the absurd question, "Can humans *be* a bat?" And, of course, dismisses the question as not only absurd but also insulting to humans who are at the centre of things.

Now, it is true the ontological and the epistemological are connected. What a thing is determines what a thing can experience. But the "unavoidable anthropocentrism" defended by Bogost only enters at the second level; not the first.

65:  "There is considerable difference between accepting the truth of human accounts of object perceptions and recognizing that, as humans, we are destined to offer anthropomorphic metaphors for the unit operations of object perception, particularly when our intention frequently involves communicating those accounts to other humans."

Quoting Jane Bennett, *Vibrant Matter*, 120: "Maybe it's worth running the risks associated with anthropomorphizing (superstition, the divinization of nature, romanticism) because it, only oddly, works against anthropocentrism: a chord is struck between person and thing, and I am no longer above or outside a nonhuman 'environment.'"

Frans de Waal makes a similar argument the anthropomorphization of primates. Not mentioned by Bogost.

66:  "Objects try to make sense of each other through the qualities and logics they possess. When one object caricatures another, the first grasps the second in abstract, enough for the one to make some sense of the other given its own internal properties. A caricature is a rendering that captures some aspects of something else at the cost of other aspects."

67:  "If we take seriously Harman's suggestion that relation takes place not just *like* metaphor but *as* metaphor, then an opportunity suggests itself: what if we deployed *metaphor itself* as a way to grasp alien objects' perceptions of one another. [...] Metaphorism offers a method for alien phenomenology to grasp at the ways objects bask metaphorically in each others' "notes" (Harman's name, following Xavier Zubíri for the attributes of a real object) by *means of metaphor itself*, rather than by describing the effects of such interactions on the objects."

72-3:  "Large, white letters on black, a bumper sticker reads, 'Soy is Murder.' It's a riff off the 'Meat is Murder' adage popular among some animal rights proponents, a slogan itself borrowed from the pro-vegetarian title track of the second album by the Smiths. It's tempting to read the bumper sticker as a send-up, a caustic imputation of moral vegetarianism through backhanded reductio ad absurdum. But further reflection might dampen an initial scoff. Is wrestling a tuber from the ground or ripping a pea from its pod a sort of violence?"

Let's grant the objection: violence against a plant is still violence just as violence against an animal is still violence. The problem here is equivocation. "Still violence" is not the same. This claim follows from a lengthy discussion of how cameras capture images and, among other things, concludes that different cameras capture different. The act is more or less the same in each case: capturing. But the means through which the capturing is done and the effects of that capturing differs significantly. Likewise, we can readily grant that "wrestling a tuber from the ground" is violence just as killing a chicken is violence. Yet, these two violences are not equivalent. The violence is not experienced in the same way---plants (however they perceive) do not perceive violence done to them in the same way as animals (which appear to perceive akin to humans in many cases) perceive violence done to them. 

This leads to two possible conclusions when we move from perception to ethics:

(1) For animals, having violence done to them seems to matter to them in a way that the violence is unwanted.
(2) For plants, having violence done to them seems to matter in a different way. For some plants, the violence is necessary for reproduction; for other it is not. For some plants, minor violence can cause death; for others it does not. 

A one-to-one equivalent of "violence" between plants and animals (and, if we are to believe Bogost, material objects) just does not work. While "violence" might be the relevant vector of analysis in ethics of animals (including animals), it is not necessarily the relevant vector of analysis in the ethics of plants and material objects. This does not deny that, for instance, clear-cutting could be (is?) a moral harm to the trees, ecosystem, environment, nature just as fraking or mountain-top removal mining is a harm to that mountain, ecosystem, environment, nature. 

73:  "The criticism of selective effrontery has long plagued veganism, whose proponents have developed several responses to the accusation. One downplays the suffering of plants by arguing that they have no central nervous system and thus cannot experience pain like animals can. Another points out that some plants must be eaten to spread their seed and reproduce---fruits, for example. There's even a name for eating only fallen seeds, frutarianism. Such a diet is sometimes correlated with *ahimsa*, a tenet to 'do no harm' central to Buddhism, Hinduism and particularly Jainism.
"To the first response, opponents have responded that such an argument assumes that feeling-by-nervous-system is the only kind of senstation. Others clearly exist, even if they remain unfamiliar. Plants sense the world, too, whether to seek out light or water, or to react chemically to external threats. To the second response, they make rejoinders to logic: even the strictest Jainist *ahimsa* risks its own violation, since to eat the seed is also to disrupt its final cause, the new tree. Does the wanton destruction of a new plant qualify as harm?"

The lack of references to actual arguments is striking. Setting that aside. The first "criticism of selective effrontery" is both correct and completely irrelevant to the issue at hand. The capacity of plants to "sense the world" in such a way that they respond to light, water, and other environmental changes is not necessarily ethically relevant. At the level of "alien phenomenology," such sensory capacities are no doubt relevant to the analysis (as they should be). But, the next step is unfounded: just because those capacities exist, that does not mean that they are morally relevant. For instance, my hands have the capacity to type on a keyboard. If I were to lose my hands in whatever way (chopped off while cutting firewood; severed as punishment; and so on), I would not suffer a moral harm by no longer being able to manipulate a keyboard with my hands. These capacities of plants to react to stimuli *might* be ethically relevant, but (1) there is no argument as to why they may be and (2) the mere fact of these capacities is not of ethical relevance.

The second "criticism of selective effrontery" is a rather poor one if it is supposed to be based in "logic" for the simple reason that logic is completely absent. (1) Plants overproduce seeds because seeds are an inefficient means of reproduction. While all seeds have the potential to develop into a new plant, very few of them actually do---whether there has been animal (including human) interference or not. If all seeds actualized their potential, the world would be covered in hemp. (2) There is a fundamental confusion over the ontological (and ethical!) status of existent beings (a tree, a human) and non-existent beings (a potential tree, a potential human). By virtue of being non-existent, a non-existent being cannot suffer a harm. Indeed, the status of being non-existent is actually benefit morally considered. More to the point, bringing a being into existence constitutes a moral harm because now that being can experience harm whereas before, as a potential being, it could only "suffer" potential harms.

73:  "No matter how you may feel about eating or abstaining from meat, appeals to feeling and suffering exemplify the correlationist conceit: the assumption that the rights any thing should have are the same ones we believe we should have; that living things more like us are more important than those less like us; and that life itself is an existence of greater worth than inanimacy. These are understandable biases for us humans. We are mortal and fragile in specific ways, and we worry about them."

Further confusions. (1) "appeals to feeling and suffering" can/may *but not necessarily* be correlationist. Peter Singer's version of utilitarianism is not correlationist. For Singer, suffering as such is what matters morally speaking. Different beings suffer in different ways, but equal suffering is counted equally in the moral calculus. The "like us" claim fails insofar as suffering of this sort is not limited to "us." There are far more creatures that suffer in this way than there are humans. This form of suffering predates the emergence of human species and will likely postdate the human species as well. It's a convenient argument for Bogost: if it is correlationist, then I can reject it---even if it is not actually correlationist! (2) "same ones we believe we should have" is a silly claim. Most humans believe that humans have the right to, for instance, drive a car if they meet the basic requirements to have a licence or vote if they meet the basic requirements for franchise. No one argues that chickens ought to or do have these rights. The rights that animal rights advocates think that animals should have are the ones that *all* animals (including humans) should have: for instance, not to be killed, not to be made to suffer, not to be confined, and to express themselves in a "natural" way. Thus, the issue isn't one of "what we should have," but of what living things (=animals) should have. (3) Bias of living over inanimate: But, of course, the rights that living things (=animals) should have does not preclude that other sorts of things (material objects, plants, etc) should have rights of their own that differ from the sorts of rights that living things (=animals) should have.

73: "Things become more difficult when we move beyond the animate and into the great outdoors. Metaphorism issues a strange challenge to problems of ethics. When we theorize ethical codes, they are always ethics *for us*. Whether deontological or consequentialist, moral standards sit on the inside of the unit *human being*; they're part of our inner formula, situated in our molten cores."

The "always" is a very strong overstatement of the case and does not have any real bearing upon what is known about other animal species. For instance, in the case of wolves, dogs, and coyotes (i.e., the social carnivores) there is an ethical code that governs play. The rules of play seem to be something to the effect of, "Play is a lot like fighting and hunting, but we don't actually fight or hunt each other." In order to signal that the play rules are going into effect (as opposed to the rules of fights), play is initiated with what is called a "play bow." The play bow means "I am inviting you to play and we will play in accordance with the rules of play. Do you want to play?" If the bow is reciprocated, then play begins. Play allows similar moves to fighting and hunting, but they are toned down. If a move is too rough, the play partner might think that we are now fighting. In order to avoid this outcome, the violator play bows again, which means "Oops! I didn't mean to bite so hard. It was an accident. Do you want to play some more?" This ethical code of play exists whether there are humans there to witness it or not. As a result, it is not a consequence of either correlationism nor of a "like us" response.

But, more importantly, this code can work *between* species. The most obvious and familiar examples are between dog and human, cat and human and cat and dog. The dog initiates play like a dog, whether it is play with a cat or with a human. If the invitation is accepted, then a hybrid form of play takes place: dog-cat play has the cat acting as though a dog and the dog acting as though a human; human-dog play has the dog acting as though a human and the human acting as though a dog; likewise with human-cat play. And, again, this is not reducible to correlationism or "like us." Having left cats and dogs home alone together, there is---more often than not---clear evidence of mutual play upon returning: after all, the cat is still alive (easy prey for almost all dogs) and the dog's face isn't ripped to shreds (easy for a cat to do with its claws defending its life). 

But play isn't the only dimension of non-human ethics. Pro-social behaviours, both within species and between species, are amply and widely discussed in the ethnological literature. For instance, there is ample laboratory evidence of mice and rats starving themselves to death if their taking food results in a conspecific receiving an electric shock. Likewise, scavengers, such as vultures, and predators, such as wolves, often work collaboratively to hunt: the scavenger needs the wolf to kill the deer in order to produce a carcass; the wolf benefits from the vulture's aerial view of the field. Finally, there is no reason to claim that when the wolves do kill the deer that the wolf hasn't violated the deer's right to life. The wolves have committed moral harm without necessarily being morally responsible for that harm. (We would say the same about a child who kills a friend.) Bogost's unfamiliarity with the literature is not an excuse for his rather odd claims.

74:  "When we form these theories ["feminist studies, postcolonial studies, animal studies, environmental studies"], we mount accounts of why and how humans ought to behave in and toward the universe, but not about how other objects ought to behave in relation to it."

There are three issues here. First, humans as a species are disproportionately harmful and that disproportionate harm should be taken into account. (This is why we are also more concerned about hydrogen bombs than buckshot: hydrogen bombs are disproportionately harmful.) Second, humans---being anthropocentric, which Bogost defends as often as he attacks---reflect upon themselves, their natures, and their actions prior to reflecting on others. For humans, how humans treat chickens is a more pressing ethical issue than how avalanches treat glaciers or glaciers treat bedrock. Third, having an account of human/non-human relations does not preclude accounts of non-human/non-human relations.

One wonders how Bogost managed to make these claims without being passingly familiar with the history of humans holding non-humans morally and legally responsible for crimes against humans. Surely he's read a newspaper and seen stories on hunting "man-killer" bears, sharks, coyotes, wolves, lions, tigers, and so on. We might excuse his ignorance of the somewhat passé idea of holding fallen bits of buildings morally and legally responsible for the damage they do, such as in ancient Greece.

